welcome to the farms commerce management
educational grain commodity marketing
school video series this video series
being brought to you and sponsored by
the Cal brand seeds to educate producers
across Canada about rain commodity
marketing well today in our ninth video
series we are going to look at your cost
of production understanding those inputs
those variable fixed costs why is it
important what really does it matter at
all should we spend some time on it and
I think we shouldn't let's go through it
so budgets on a per acre cost basis our
powerful tool for assisting farm
management a listing of inputs and
prices helps estimate how much operating
capital is needed for production an
estimate of the per bushel cost
production is useful in making effective
marketing decisions as well so we're
going to go through some of these costs
and then we'll come up with a corn
example where we go through some of the
revenue and the profit potential here in
the past couple of years both in two
thousand and two thousand eleven so
growers return is equal to the price
times the yield yield will ultimately
determine what that breakeven is
ultimately what your profit will be but
it's price times yield minus cost when
calculating costs are variable and
there's fixed costs cash costs involved
actual cash transactions non-cash cots
include expenses expenses such as
depreciation which are not associated
with an actual cash transaction variable
costs increase or decrease as use
increases or decreases fixed costs
remain constant as use increases so in
this example here with this chart you
can see that there's your total cost
there's your variable costs that tend to
go up or down depending on use and then
there's your fixed costs that are
constant variable costs include a fuel
seed fertilizer herbicides equipment
repair hard labor fixed costs include
insurance property tax and self-employed
labor so let's go to an example here
this is a tool we've created here at
farms commerce management in this
example I'm just using John Doe
terms this is april 6 of 2011 this is a
good example of today's corn producer
we're in 2011 he has to figure out what
that cost the production is because he's
thinking okay with prices where they are
today in 6 45 650 per bushel off
December can I actually make money at
these prices well historically you know
you can but let's go through that
example so in this example I'm using
five hundred and forty acres is what I'm
going to plant I'm going to assume we
got to assume a yield so I'm going to
assume a yield of 180 per bushel now you
can use your guarantee bushel yield
revenue insurance brookfield you can use
an average you can use a high yield of
180 would equate to a pretty high yield
at any given here ask whether you're in
western canada ontario or the united
states although the united states can
produce some higher yields including the
rest of the country you then have to
apply a seed on a per acre basis what's
that seed cost you're going to apply
fertilizer and then you're also going to
apply some prop chemicals these are your
farm direct expenses or variable cost
part of your variable costs we then have
to apply planting part of your tillage
cultivation per acre cam app fertilizer
up and again if you own some of the
equipment when it comes to planting and
cultivation or combining you can add
instead you're going to add a custom
right or you can add a depreciation rate
it's totally up to you we didn't have to
add hulling and trucking crop fuel and
oil repairs there's drying fuel number
in 09 late 09 we had some really high
cost and drying fuel then we got our
utilities and marketing expense if there
is one to arrive a total variable costs
okay then we get into overhead expenses
these are largely your fixed expenses
that the first one is land rent and
interest if you younger farmer that owns
a lot more debt than you're going to
have to put in you know what maybe that
interest cost is on that land or maybe
you're renting that land so what is that
land rent there's maybe a machine lease
in there somewhere along the lines if
you're you know
be leasing the equipment's that are
owning it there's some real estate taxes
hard labor apply a labor to yourself as
well I mean you still got to send the
kids to school and you got a fee and you
got to feed yourself their stores some
storage costs interest on operating loan
there's crop insurance and then there's
other expenses like phone car
depreciation and then maybe some
miscellaneous costs and you arrive at
total fixed costs we can then arrive at
a total fixed and variable costs in this
case we got 600 11.35 per acre and our
breakeven based on the yield and acres
use three dollars and forty cents if I
sell today off december two thousand
eleven including basis at 550 a bushel i
get a net profit a 210 per bushel or
three hundred and seventy-eight dollars
per acre in any given year if i can
achieve a hundred dollars break or more
profit wise that's a very good year this
is an exceptional year in fact those
producers we still have corn bushels in
the bin for 2010 are probably achieving
even higher profit per acre numbers
because they're selling potentially corn
at seven dollars or better now we can
get some free cost of production tools
to help you guys out let's start with
Western Canada what's Canada can go to
the by Tara dot see a website we've
provided the link here just click on
that link and away you go and remember
when you're using these tools or cost of
production tools that are available free
on other websites they provide some
averages across the board please don't
use those averages as your cost
production make sure you go through the
math and you do your own because
everybody has a different cost of
production ain't no I'm Terry you can go
to am a from the Ministry of Agriculture
and Food and Rural Affairs there's the
link the first link provides you some
background on cost of production just
like we've done today and in the second
link it goes into individual tools cost
of production for corn beans and so on
and so forth and then in the United
States we found this great sorry this
great Kansas State University
AG manager website and it provides some
great information for us producers
there's the link there so if you get a
chance just to visit that as well so in
some are you knowing your cost
production managing your inputs variable
and fixed costs are important markets
don't care about your costs the end of
the day but you should because it you
can actually wrap a marketing plan
around that cost or that breakeven so
that way you have an idea when you can
pull that trigger it's essential because
it can help you make better and smarter
marketing decisions in our next video
series we're going to look at fixed for
contracts and why they should be part of
any marketing plan thank you for your
spending some time with us today and we
hope that we have shed some light and
insight into cost of production and how
you can use this information to become a
more successful marketer we look forward
to seeing you next time till then thanks
for watching